[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Mona Sobhani
says, scientific materialism
can no longer be the
standard of science.
It's been proved beyond
a shadow of a doubt
that the unseen quantum
world of intelligence
has to be included in scientific
discovery, starting now.
Meanwhile, Mona's journey
was a difficult one
because it pitted her
mind against her intuition
as a scientist.
And so this is going to be a
wonderful conversation for those
of you who know doubters
or are doubters yourself.
So, Mona, welcome.
I've never met you before.
This is the first time.
Welcome to Open Minds.
>>MONA SOBHANI: Thank you
so much for having me.
>>REGINA: And you
took a brave journey
because you're from
a Persian family.
And so it's-- we were
talking off camera.
I said, were you always
a little sciencey kid?
Because you took this
all, and you said, no.
>>SOBHANI: Mm-mm, science
was my worst subject,
those standardized tests
that you take every year.
I had, like, the highest
percentile for every subject.
And then science would
be like 70 out of 100.
And it was mostly because I just
wasn't interested in the science
that they were teaching us.
It'd be like geology or weather
patterns or whatever it was,
and I wasn't interested in that.
So it wasn't until I found
neuroscience in, I think,
my 12th grade--
I think it was 12th grade when
I started to get interested
in science, actually.
>>REGINA: Yeah
started lighting up.
Well, so even though your
family, which is your
to be successful, you
need a good career path.
You choose science,
not art, right?
>>SOBHANI: Yes.
>>REGINA: Or literature.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, and
I'm Persian, so it's--
we're either lawyers or doctors.
That's the choice.
>>REGINA: OK, so you
chose the doctor path.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
>>REGINA: But what's
interesting to me
in reading about you
is that your mother,
the matrilineal part of your
family were very intuitive
and used old school practices
with their intuition.
So bring us into that world
of coffee ground readings
from grandma and your mom.
>>SOBHANI: Yes,
so in our culture,
we're actually very mystical.
The history of the Persian
lineage is very mystical,
and one of the traditions that
was passed down was divination.
My grandmother, the
way that she practiced
that was using coffee grinds,
like, not American coffee,
like thicker Turkish,
Armenian, Greek coffee.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
grind it like that.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, and
you leave it in the cup,
so it creates pictures.
So then, the reader looks at
the pictures and intuits things
about the person's life
past, present, or future.
So my grandma used to do
this, and she taught my mom
how to do it.
She tried to teach
the other kids,
but they weren't
as good as my mom.
So my mom started doing it for
our family friends at parties,
and I never noticed it
because I grew up with it.
So it was very in
the background.
And obviously, I was a kid.
I wasn't drinking coffee,
so I didn't notice it.
But when I started
going to grad school,
and I would go home
on the weekends,
she would make me coffee,
and then absentmindedly,
like, turn it over and
just start reading.
And I was in graduate
school for neuroscience.
So I was--
>>REGINA: Mom.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah,
I'm a scientist.
I don't believe in this.
But she would say things,
and I would just listen,
and then I would take notes.
And over time, I
noticed that she
would get a lot
of details right,
and things that she would
say would come true weeks
in advance.
They would pan out over
weeks, sometimes even months.
And a lot of times they would be
things that I couldn't possibly
know they were coming.
She couldn't possibly know.
So it was the
number of variables
that she would get correct,
the small, meaningful details
that nobody in my
life would know,
things that I would
just think in my head
but that were very
meaningful to.
>>REGINA: That were
coming out the ground.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, she
would say them out loud,
and I would just sit
there, and sometimes there
were things I would not
want my mom to know.
Like, I would
purposely not tell her.
>>REGINA: You can't keep
secrets from that kind of mom.
>>SOBHANI: So yeah, you--
Sometimes, yeah,
I would not want
to have coffee
because I'd be like, I
don't her to want to know.
>>REGINA: Was just spying on me.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, so I couldn't
explain it with science.
So I just lived in
cognitive dissonance
and kind of ignored it
because I couldn't really
reconcile the two worlds.
But I came to count
on it because she was
more right than she was wrong.
So I knew it worked.
I didn't know how it worked.
I didn't know why,
but it was useful.
>>REGINA: And as I
recall, you kept a diary
for 10 years of those readings.
>>SOBHANI: Yes.
>>REGINA: So at what point did
you start taking her seriously
and start writing down
what she had told you?
>>SOBHANI: So my
friends would fight over
who could come over on
Sundays to get readings.
>>REGINA: Oh, because
they all wanted readings?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, they
all wanted readings.
>>REGINA: Now, how old
were you by this time?
>>SOBHANI: I was
in my early 20s.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Young adult, OK.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah,
we were, I think
that's when I started to notice.
I'm like, well,
my friends really
want to come over
for these readings.
Like, maybe I should pay
more attention to them.
And I think that's when
I started taking notes.
I mean, also, I would forget
things that she would say,
and then it would become hard to
be like, is that what she said?
My memory is not reliable?
So I was like, well,
if I want to be--
I'm in grad school
to be a scientist.
I should be taking notes.
So that's why I
started taking notes.
And yeah, I tracked
it for over 10 years.
I mean, anytime she reads for
me, I'll jot down what she says,
if I think it's--
which that's the funny thing.
I should have learned by now.
It's not always what
I think is important.
It's usually-- yeah, it's--
>>REGINA: It's something
trying to come out
in a message for
you, and you just
are dismissing it sometimes.
We do that.
>>SOBHANI: Definitely.
>>REGINA: OK.
So I'd like to get
into the nature
of a couple of the readings
that really kind of rocked you.
And it is interesting.
We all still when we
have these experiences,
we think, how is this possible?
Still, even those who are
experienced in this realm.
So one of them had
to do, your mom
saw a man with beautiful,
long eyelashes.
>>SOBHANI: Yes, so this was one
of the moments, I think, where--
so I was dating somebody.
It was in my mid, early 20s.
Dating this guy, and
I remember-- to me,
I loved his lashes.
They were very
long and beautiful,
but it was not something I
said out loud to anybody.
And it wasn't a common
feature I always
liked in the guys I
was dating or anything.
It was just him specifically.
>>REGINA: Unique to him.
But weren't you also--
as I recall, in
your culture, you
don't just go talking about
someone you went on a first date
with.
>>SOBHANI: Oh, yeah, I
would never tell my mom.
>>REGINA: You have
to-- you have to wait
until it's very serious before
you would even mention anyone.
>>SOBHANI: That's right.
Our culture takes, I guess,
dating very seriously.
And my parents,
especially my mom,
is pretty old-school,
so I wasn't though.
So I was just living my
life the way I wanted to
and I just wouldn't
tell her anything.
So when she would
do the readings,
that's what I was
referring to earlier.
Like things I wouldn't want
her to know or things like that
where she would see things and
I just wouldn't say anything.
She'd be like, well, it looks
like there's a guy in your life.
And that would just
sit there quietly.
>>REGINA: Turning red.
>>SOBHANI: Yes, and then so
for this guy she mentioned,
she's like, oh, and it
looks like he has really
long, beautiful eyelashes.
And every time that she would
do a reading, he would show up
and she would mention the--
he became the lash guy.
And it was what it shook me
though the first time because it
was just a thought that I had
never said out loud to anybody,
I hadn't told anybody.
It was so weird.
I mean, there were obviously
other things I liked about him.
So it was kind of
interesting that
was like the meaningful
detail that she picked up on,
and it became this thing
that represented him.
And that was something
I couldn't understand
from a science perspective,
but that deeply intrigued me
about the readings.
>>REGINA: Yes, oh,
I'm sure it would.
You start getting into all kinds
of entanglement theory by then.
All right?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, and another
one she was telling you,
which I mean, it sounds
like a Gypsy fortune teller.
You're going to
get very bad news.
But she didn't say this
like a Gypsy fortune teller.
She was very sincere in
trying to give you a heads up.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, so she
didn't usually give bad news.
Yeah, but it was--
I think it was 2016.
And for a few weeks, she
was seeing something,
and she would get
kind of awkward.
And then, finally, she said,
I don't want to scare you,
but I feel like I should warn
you that because I've seen it
for a few weeks in
a row that you're
going to get some
bad news, and that
shook me because my mom
never said things like that.
And so I was like,
what do you mean?
I tried to get more
information out of her,
but she wouldn't
say anything else.
She was like, I don't really
know what I'm looking at,
and I don't want to--
>>REGINA: Program, yeah, yeah.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, and put
it in your head, and what
if it doesn't
happen or whatever.
So she's like, just
keep that in mind.
So for six weeks--
and I told you, by this
point, I trusted her.
Like, I knew--
I felt like it's possible
something could happen.
So for six weeks,
I kind of lived
in this very anxious
state of like, who
is going to give me bad news?
And I would ask my
friends who has bad news.
And I tried to get ahead of it.
Of course, I didn't.
But six weeks later,
I got a message
from one of my classmates
that-- they're like,
have you heard the news?
And I'm like, I knew it.
This is it.
And one of our
professors at USC was
killed by one of the
students in the program,
and it was somebody who had
worked on one of my dissertation
experiments.
>>REGINA: He was close to you.
>>SOBHANI: With me, yeah.
So it was very
upsetting, obviously,
for the whole community
and for me personally.
And so I told my mom I was
like, I think I know what it is.
I think it's this.
And she said, Yeah.
So then, she's like,
I knew it was a death.
It looked like a death.
She was like, I didn't
want to tell you,
why get upset beforehand?
>>REGINA: You go
looking for things.
>>SOBHANI: Right,
and she's like-- she
said she had also
never seen anything
like it, which is
interesting because it
was an unusual circumstance.
>>REGINA: For a student
to kill a professor.
Absolutely.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, so
she's like, I just
had not seen anything like it.
And she's like, so I
didn't know what it meant.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So then, we
go on, and then we'll
wrap this phase up about mom.
But then, mom saw
a romance for you.
>>SOBHANI: Right, so
that event with the death
shook me because also
suddenly the readings were
about life and death, which
before this, they were not.
And so that kind of
shook me and made
me think about the universe.
And is there something that
exists like fate or destiny?
Because how could the
information of your death
be available in the
ethers ahead of time?
But I didn't do
anything with that.
I just kind of it scared me.
And then, I went
on with my life.
But then, if you-- it was
a couple of years later,
I got in this relationship,
and I was like,
oh, I'm going to be happy now.
This is it.
>>REGINA: And she
told you you're
going to be in a relationship.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, and
she had seen that.
>>REGINA: And she said
it would be a good one.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, she said,
and it was a good one.
And she saw all these details.
Everything was correct,
again, all the creepy details.
He didn't have eyelashes, but
she got other details about him
correct that were
very specific to him.
And yeah, she was
like, it'll be good.
But then it ended.
So then, to me,
that wasn't good.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so then it made you
start doubting things
and put you into a dark place.
>>SOBHANI: It made me just
feel confused, I think.
Yes, definitely dark.
There were a lot of
things, I think, in my life
falling apart at that time.
It was one of those
eras where everything
started to deconstruct.
>>REGINA: What was happening?
By the way, what was happening
in your professional life?
>>SOBHANI: So I had a new
job that I had started,
but I had hit the workforce
after getting my PhD.
And I started having a bit
of an existential crisis
because every morning,
I would wake up
and think, oh no, is this it.
This is what we do
forever until we die.
We just go to work and have
no time to do anything.
>>REGINA: What were you doing
day by day in your work?
>>SOBHANI: I was working at
a Research Center at USC.
So I was running operations
and running the studies.
So it was a very,
very demanding job.
And I was working
a lot of hours.
So that's why I think
I was thinking--
>>REGINA: In the
field of neuroscience?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, it was
neuroscience and digital health.
And so it was just
very demanding.
And I started to--
>>REGINA: Repetitious,
probably, a bit of that?
>>SOBHANI: Actually,
it was not repetitious.
>>REGINA: That's good.
>>SOBHANI: Actually,
every day was a new thing.
But that also has
its challenges.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
You have to figure
things out every day.
So it was a lot.
It was a lot.
And yeah, I just started to have
an existential crisis, I think.
And then all of those, the death
and the relationship ending
and then a few other
things, I just fell.
And the relationship
was the final--
I was like, I give up, and I
just fell into a depression.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: And you
continued with your job
but just struggled in your
personal life then for a while?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
I was like a zombie.
I don't know where
I went mentally,
but I was never present.
>>REGINA: But this question
lingered, thinking back
on what happened to the
Professor, foretold of six weeks
before it happened, about free
will and destiny and mind.
And this became a real
area of seeking for you.
>>SOBHANI: Yes.
>>REGINA: Just launch
in and tell us all about
that because this is a big one.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
So after I was in this dark
space for a few months,
I started to come
out and my mind
started to come back online.
And I was thinking about the
coffee because I was confused.
I'm like, sometimes it was
right, sometimes it was wrong.
Or the interpretation,
what matters, or maybe I
was making it up all along.
And neuroscience and
science is right.
We create meaning in our minds.
So I decided to start exploring.
And I think it wasn't
even my decision at first.
I'm from Los Angeles.
So I had a group of girlfriends
that I grew up with.
And we know of a
really good psychic.
And she'll turn you away If
she can't read your energy.
She turned my friend away twice.
>>REGINA: Because you didn't
want to go to your mom for this.
>>SOBHANI: Well, I wanted
to try something different.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I got you.
>>SOBHANI: I wanted
to explore the space
and see how it was
for other people.
And so we went to
do these readings.
And it was really fascinating
because they were much more
detailed than my mom.
But they were each
good in their own ways.
But they were very detailed.
And I, of course, recorded
them and took notes.
And they got so many
variables right, again,
for each event that I
just didn't understand
how it could be possible.
So they blew my mind.
And that launched me
on a personal project
to interview these intuitives
because I started to wonder.
Let's say, it's true.
Let's say, they're picking
up on a signal or something.
What is perceiving the signal?
Is it the brain?
And if it's the brain,
what part of the brain
and what makes them
special and different?
So I started to go into
science mode about it.
But I was really interested
in just talking to them
about their experience of it
because when they do readings,
a lot of them would say,
like, I feel it in my heart,
or I'm seeing, or I'm hearing.
And so I had so many questions.
So I started interviewing them.
And they would also
mention in the readings,
I forgot to mention
this, they would
mention reincarnation and
soul lessons and soul groups.
And I did not grow up spiritual.
I was not exposed to any kind
of spiritual philosophy--
>>REGINA: Any religion?
>>SOBHANI: --or religion,
really, and especially not one
that included reincarnation.
So whenever they would say
those things in the readings,
I would just zone out, and
it would go over my head.
But like I said, I recorded
them and wrote it down.
I just didn't know what to
do with that information.
And so when I started talking
to them and then reading,
then a picture started to form.
And I got curious about that.
It started to land
in my head as,
like, maybe I should
look at this next.
And I also started to interview
my scientist colleagues
because I started to feel crazy.
>>REGINA: No.
This is really the wonderful
part of your story,
is you were not going
to let this one go.
You were a dog with a bone.
And you were going to
get to the bottom of it
because one thing you know
how to do is research.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, yeah.
And I thought, all right, I'll
interview these intuitives,
get their personal experience.
I asked a lot of them,
do you believe in fate,
do you believe in destiny,
how does this work.
But I don't know, they
weren't as concerned
with those questions.
And I turned to my
scientist colleagues.
They were interesting.
They were more open-minded than
I thought that they would be.
They were more
open-minded than me.
Apparently, all of them
had had experiences
or knew somebody close to
them, like a family member,
like a mother who had,
or claimed to have,
abilities like that,
psychic or whatnot.
So they were all very like,
well, science is a tool.
We use it to explore.
We don't know everything.
>>REGINA: But like you said
in your book, a lot of them
were content with that.
>>SOBHANI: And they
were fine with that.
>>REGINA: We're just not
going to-- we don't know.
Some things have to
remain a mystery.
And that's where you
come in and say, no, it
doesn't have to
remain a mystery.
We can figure this out.
>>SOBHANI: Yes.
One of my dissertation
advisors is one
of the people I interviewed.
And she's a psychologist
and neuroscientist
and a genetic behaviorist.
And so she was like,
turned it on me.
And she's like, it's
really fascinating
that you can't accept a mystery
or that something would just
be a mystery.
And I'm like, I don't know why.
I need more than that.
>>REGINA: But she was
happy with just a mystery,
even though she
was overeducated.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
She was like, oh,
what's the big deal?
We don't know.
I'm like, oh no, I need to know.
>>REGINA: And I love that
you had the courage and just
the stamina to continue
going down that rabbit hole
because you encountered
some of my favorite people
along the way, certainly.
But it's heartening
for us to know
that so many of your colleagues
actually had these experiences
and were open-minded, even
though the systems were not
allowing them to study
it further at all.
>>SOBHANI: Yes.
So in private, these
were all conversations
that happened over
Zoom during COVID.
And I know that some
of them would be OK
discussing it publicly.
But I also know that
some of them would not.
So there was a wide range within
all the people I spoke to,
of who would be comfortable.
>>REGINA: And how many of them
wished that their field would
allow for real discovery?
>>SOBHANI: Some.
But I think, just
like other people,
you get in the habit and the
rut just of doing your job.
>>REGINA: And you've got
10 years down the road.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, not
questioning it because to do
that would upset everything.
And it's, like, you finally
figure it out, the road,
and you don't really
want to upset that.
But I will say, that
was at the beginning.
As I went down the journey
further and further,
and even people I knew
previously, but didn't
know that they were spiritual
or open to these things,
those people that I
connected with later,
they started to have, like
me, like a fire underneath
to be like, well, this
is just ridiculous.
This is really
disingenuous that we
talk about these
things in private,
but we don't dare
talk about them in--
>>REGINA: Professionally.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, academic space.
It doesn't make sense.
It's just there's no
integrity in that.
So yeah, it started to evolve.
I think more and more
scientists started to come out.
>>REGINA: So, really,
in the field of science,
you were becoming a disruptor.
>>SOBHANI: I guess so.
>>REGINA: You hadn't
planned on it.
But that's what
we need right now,
lots of disruptors, because
the people watching this
know this paradigm
has to change.
We can't live on
this old science.
It's worn out.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah,
it's very limited.
>>REGINA: It's very limited.
It has its purpose,
but it's so incomplete.
And so you were
looking as to how you
might be able to flesh it out.
And we'll get to where you
landed with all of this
besides writing the book.
So this ultimately took you when
you were doing your interviews
to Russell Targ, whom I love.
And I worked with him
initially, I think 1985 or 1986.
Somewhere in there was my
first interview with him when
they were doing those famous
Russian experiments that he
was famous for, which was they
were doing remote viewing.
And the kicker was
into the future.
And of course, they had very,
very good psychics at the time.
And so I was fascinated
with it and put it
on the news when I was
a little news anchor.
And so you ran into
him decades later.
And then he shared some things
with you that, I'm sure,
opened your eyes.
But also, we're going to get
to another fellow in a minute.
So what did you take
away from Russell?
>>SOBHANI: So it was Hal Puthoff
that I spoke to, actually.
>>REGINA: Oh, Hal.
I thought it was Russell.
>>SOBHANI: But in my mind,
they're very closely related.
>>REGINA: They are, very.
>>SOBHANI: Same
program, so yeah.
No.
It was awesome because
that was really early on.
I think I had just read the
papers that they had published.
There were a couple
they published
in big science journals.
I think it was literally Nature
or maybe Science and then
the Electrical Engineering one.
And I was really blown away.
I was really impressed.
And so I asked to speak with
them to discern if he was nuts.
Because I was still in that
phase, where I was like,
are all these people--
is this a conspiracy?
>>REGINA: Is this
legit scientists?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
But he blew my socks off.
I mean, he was
talking about things.
Obviously, he's a
physicist, and I'm not.
So he talks about a lot of
things I have no idea about.
So I just took
copious notes and went
to research it all afterward.
But he explained the
experiments that they did to me
and what he witnessed
and even more stories
around the research, like all
the people and the interactions
with the government.
>>REGINA: Well, the CIA was
supporting that operation.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: So obviously,
there's some value in it
because they're spending a
lot of covert money on it.
>>SOBHANI: That's
what really got to me.
Because in my job, we
worked with the military,
and we applied for grants.
And we had funding
from the government.
And they do not
give money easily,
and they do not renew
programs easily.
>>REGINA: I think they
funded them for 20 years.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
And that's what, honestly,
what caught my attention.
I was like, 20 years?
I was like, we can't get
our program funded again.
But this got funded
for 20 years.
But yeah, so that said to
me that there was something
there because just from
personal experience working
with the funding
agencies, I'm like,
they don't renew just anything.
And then reading the science
and then speaking to him,
and yeah, he just believed it.
Especially the science,
I just thought,
yes, some of the
older experiments
were methods we wouldn't use.
But then those experiments
had been replicated many times
in modern days in
many different labs.
So it seemed like a
very solid research.
>>REGINA: You landed
in a very solid place.
Then came Mark Boccuzzi.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
I was really interested in
mediumship and psychic phenomena
and the difference
between the two.
And he is the one who--
I spoke to him early on,
and I was so grateful
because he was, like, let me
just give you a reading list.
He's like, I'm going to
send you a big reading list.
And you can sit and read through
all this and then come back.
>>REGINA: Then come
back, grasshopper.
>>SOBHANI: Yes, exactly.
That was the tone.
And it was a very
big reading list.
But it was very educational.
And he's right.
There was a lot
that I didn't know.
I think he's the one
who actually told me
that this had been studied
for over 100 years.
And there were so
many experiments.
And I started to
dig into all of it.
And I was like,
oh, he was right.
There's a lot here.
And my reaction, I was
kind of incredulous
that we, as in scientists,
mainstream science,
were not aware of any
of these experiments.
I didn't even bother to look
up the research initially
because I didn't
think it existed.
So when he told me
that, I was like, no.
But then I went and found there
was so much research, so much
research, that
there had been what
we call reviews and
meta-analysis, which
is when you pull all
the research together,
there's so much that you can
pull it together and look
at it as a whole.
>>REGINA: So much proof
for the phenomena.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
So they had that.
And I thought, this is crazy.
How come we don't
know about this?
Because it really challenges,
not the rest of what
we've done-- a lot of normal
science still stands--
but I think if you're looking
at the intention work,
it does affect our
scientific method
and how we design experiments.
So yeah, I just
started thinking,
this is really important.
And we're not looking at it.
>>REGINA: And you're
not looking at it.
And then you started
meeting with some people
fairly high up in
the government.
>>SOBHANI: So yeah,
Hal connected me
with various different
people that he knew.
And I just spoke to them.
Each person that I spoke to
was another crisis for me.
>>REGINA: Because it opened up
a new can of worms of research,
understanding, experience.
>>SOBHANI: Everything that they
said, every word, every topic, I
had never heard of before.
So it's stuff all over Gaia now.
But it's things that I
had never encountered.
And so I would just take
notes and sit there wide-eyed
and just listen.
But after every call, I
would sob on the floor
because I was like, I
don't understand anything.
What's happening?
>>REGINA: It made you
feel like you knew nothing
in the face of
everything, right?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
And then, I mean, also, some
of it is just really weird.
And so you're like, oh, is
reality really this weird?
Or like, what is the truth?
And if so, it's a
little upsetting
if you're coming
from just mainstream
science and normal
life to, in some ways,
you don't want to know about.
I felt I started to feel like
I wish I didn't know about some
of this stuff.
I wish--
>>REGINA: Give us
an example of what
really disturbed you
because you just couldn't
get your mind around it.
>>SOBHANI: The
dimensions and, maybe,
beings in other dimensions
and their ability
to maybe come in and out of
ours, that was upsetting to me.
I wish I didn't know about that.
>>REGINA: That's upsetting
to a lot of people
when they first encountered that
information even if you're not
a scientist.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
No, it was really
more as a person.
Yeah.
I was like, I don't know
that I want to know this.
It was frightening.
But it settled, I
think, initially,
and then you get used to it.
And it's settled.
>>REGINA: Did you
ultimately come across,
I assume, the concepts
of parallel timelines
and that time is not linear?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
>>REGINA: How did
that affect you?
Because that's one that
I think most people still
grapple with a bit
because it's hard to get
our linear minds around.
>>SOBHANI: That one actually
made more sense to me.
I'm not sure why.
And it excited me.
I thought it was exciting.
I thought, that's cool if
you can affect the past
from the present or the future.
Or I don't know.
I just thought it
was really exciting.
>>REGINA: And so that was
more comfortable for you?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
And I think probably because of
the coffee readings with my mom
because I had already seen--
>>REGINA: You
already experienced.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah,
that might be why.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
So ultimately,
after interviewing
all of these people,
what to you was the most
shocking and powerful--
and I know it's hard to
answer-- bit of evidence
that you came across that if
you had just 15 seconds to say,
this thing rocked
your world when
you were doing this research,
what would that have been?
>>SOBHANI: I think maybe the
consciousness surviving death.
>>REGINA: Reincarnation?
>>SOBHANI: Maybe yes,
which is related to that.
It survives death.
And then, yeah, that, I
actually believe it now.
I think I believe
that it's possible.
I think that one really shook
me because, as a neuroscientist,
we're taught that the
brain, the physical matter
of the brain, the neurons,
produce consciousness.
And so if there was no brain,
there would be no consciousness.
And this is really driven home.
So when I started
doing this research,
I didn't encounter that
theory until a few months in.
And when I did, I was
immediately like, no,
that is not possible.
>>REGINA: Yeah, because that
was strictly against everything
you were taught.
>>SOBHANI: I was like,
that's just not possible.
But what it took was
me reading philosophy
to understand that there
are other worldviews
and to even understand
that mainstream science's
worldview is scientific
materialism or physicalism.
They don't teach you that.
That's an assumption
with-- no one ever tells us
that what we're working under.
And you never learn that
there's other possibilities,
like panpsychism or
idealism or whatever.
So once I learned
that, I would say,
things rapidly turned around
because there was finally
room for an explanation for
all of this that made sense.
And the consciousness didn't
have to come from the brain
anymore.
So that limitation that
I had from my training,
you're just like, oh,
this is my training.
It's under scientific
materialism,
but there's other philosophies.
And so if I just step outside of
that, it's perfectly reasonable.
>>REGINA: And then because
the areas of science
don't speak to each other,
they're not collaborating,
they're not
communicating, and you'd
think neuroscience would
be at the center of a very
vast exploration about
the greater mind.
But it's not.
>>SOBHANI: It's not.
Yeah.
No.
Neuroscience, just
like all other science,
is very specialized.
We all have our niches
that we stay inside of.
>>REGINA: Right.
And that's going to
be drawing to a close,
hopefully, pretty soon.
I mean, we'll talk
about that in a minute.
But that's one of the things
that bothered you because here
you had mental illness.
You could talk about a
break from zero point.
And this was something
that really fascinated you.
And as a neuroscientist--
and there were psychologists,
you never spoke to each other.
You never got to look at the
whole situation with the person.
Tell us a little bit about that
and what drove you on that path.
>>SOBHANI: Yes.
So neuroscience takes a
very reductionist view
of mental illness.
And I won't go into
the whole history.
>>REGINA: We probably
wouldn't understand it.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
So it's very reductionist
and very chemical.
I mean, I do think people are
familiar with that, the idea
that depression is a
chemical imbalance.
That has been a narrative
for a long time.
These are all
narrative-based, they're
theories that we come
up with in the field
to explain some behavior.
>>REGINA: And there's
some truth in it.
We've all heard about
dopamine and serotonin
and neurotransmitters
and neurochemicals.
We've heard these things.
It's common now to
have heard that.
>>SOBHANI: But well,
first of all, we still
don't have a good understanding,
actually, of mental illness.
Because if we did,
we would probably
be better able to create
pharmaceuticals or whatever,
any kind of treatment, whatever
it is that could address this.
But our treatments
for mental illness
are terrible and lacking.
>>REGINA: Terrible, basically
put a person in a stupor.
>>SOBHANI: Yes, yeah.
And the drugs only work, I
think, for 50% of the people,
50% of the time.
>>REGINA: There's
always lobotomy.
We do have other tools.
>>SOBHANI: It did have
its benefits, though.
Yeah.
So I think, yeah, we never
learned about psychology,
though, and cognitive behavioral
therapy and all of those things.
Neuroscience never even
touches that, which is crazy,
to think that if you're
a neuroscientist working
on depression, I'm not sure that
you spend a lot of time looking
into behavioral therapies or
how those could maybe even work
together with the chemical
model that you're using.
I mean, I'm not
aware of, if there
are very few labs that look at
the overlap and the interplay
between them.
So as a result, we don't have
good models of mental illness.
And we don't have
good treatments.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So I'm going to ask
you to go out on a limb
because now it seems that the
world is experiencing almost
an epidemic of mental illness.
And it's showing up
in a lot of ways.
Kids are being drugged.
People are living and
sleeping on the streets.
There's a kind of
cognitive dissonance
where people are just
floating through life.
What, with everything
you've studied,
on a multi-dimensional
level, do you
consider to be feeding the
state we call mental illness?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
If I were to step back into
my old neuroscience shoes
before all this
stuff happened to me,
I would despair and be like,
we have no understanding
of mental illness, and we're
nowhere near understanding it.
But after this journey, I
started exploring psychology.
And I started trying all these
different treatment modalities
that I came across in the books
I was reading, like past life
regression and psychedelics
and emotional freedom technique
and all these different things.
And I started to see in
myself an improvement
in emotional regulation,
understanding my own emotions,
connecting with myself,
even knowing what I want,
or who I was.
And I, in that
literature, found models
of what goes wrong when you
lose connection with yourself,
or when you don't
address your traumas
or come to be in good
relationship with your emotions.
So, I mean, as a
neuroscientist, I
would have scoffed at all
of that and been like,
no, it's chemicals, and
we'll figure it out,
the neurotransmitters.
But I personally experienced the
benefit of all of those things,
And they changed
my life drastically
for the better, including
my shift in worldview.
So even flipping the worldview
to think that the universe might
not be meaningless, or that
there's no meaning to life, even
flipping that significantly
improved my quality of life.
>>REGINA: And to be able
to, perhaps, fold into it
and, maybe, what's influencing
this person isn't even
from this lifetime.
>>SOBHANI: Right.
>>REGINA: Maybe it's
something embedded
in the subconscious somewhere.
And science doesn't even know
how to address the subconscious.
>>SOBHANI: Yes, it's a lot.
Neuroscience definitely
doesn't address that.
So I mean, they're starting
to with the emergence
of attachment theory.
>>REGINA: That's
popular right now.
A lot of shorts
on that out there.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, we'll see.
But that one is useful.
And it does connect the
subconscious behavior
to conscious behavior
and how that plays out.
So I would say, that's the
best we've gotten thus far.
And it might help connect
neuroscience and psychology.
But there has been a lot
lacking in that area.
And I think it really is like
a disconnection from ourselves,
from nature, from each other,
from a higher power, all
those things that have caused--
>>REGINA: People spending
so much time alone
in their siloed
information that it
is creating a mass cognitive
dissonance and an inability
to even look at another person
that feels differently than you
and understand them
or accept them at all.
>>SOBHANI: Definitely.
>>REGINA: That is kind of a
low-grade mental illness where
you can't take
difference anymore.
>>SOBHANI: That's right.
Yeah.
Nobody can take-- they
can't be uncomfortable.
>>REGINA: They can't
be uncomfortable.
If someone disagrees with you,
your whole body seizes up.
And now you're in a
mild panic mode what
to do with this friendship.
We disagreed on something.
Right now, it seems
that we have been
groomed to have very little
emotional resilience.
>>SOBHANI: Yes, you're right.
I completely agree with that.
Yes.
It's like, if something
makes you uncomfortable
or triggers you, you just shut
it down, walk out, walk away
from it.
But I learned in a
lot of the research
that I was doing, even though it
started off spiritual and then
quickly became healing
work and psychological,
that you came here to allegedly
work through this stuff
to feel it all.
And the only way
to really heal is
to feel it and work through it.
So, I mean, I started doing
that even though it was hard.
I was very avoidant
initially, so
out of touch with my
emotions, very repressed.
And part of that is
science because you
have to put on this
persona of being
very hard and serious and
unemotional and objective.
And that really starts to
solidify, like, you just
become rigid in every way.
So I think after this
journey, I started
trying to lean into that.
If something makes
me uncomfortable,
trying to lean into it and
understand it and address it.
>>REGINA: It takes courage.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
And I mean, I found it
very helpful, personally.
And in all the
literature I read,
it seems like that's
the best way forward.
>>REGINA: So part
of your mission
now is to help the
world of science
and other scientists understand,
we've got to break free,
we've got to open our minds.
We've got to start
seriously researching
these other modalities
even if it requires
creating new departments
with new kinds of science
and, also, speaking
to each other
because you've probably
come to understand
the mind is something far
different than what you thought
it was.
>>SOBHANI: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: A lot of moving
parts there, permeating
every cell of the body.
>>SOBHANI: Yep, definitely.
Yes.
So I was thinking,
how could I help,
because scientists are
really, really busy,
and we usually don't have time.
If I'm a neuroscientist,
and I do cognitive work,
I usually don't even have time
to read something molecular,
much less something
way out there,
like metaphysical or spiritual.
So my collaborator and
I, Allison Paradise,
she's a neuroscientist
too, we thought,
what if we went
to the conference
that everyone goes to.
It's our Annual Society for
Neuroscience Conference.
It's the biggest in the field
and maybe even in science.
It has 30,000 or 40,000
attendees every year.
So they're already
going to this.
It's for their careers.
They're going to be there.
So what if we did a session
there and just created a space?
And we'll call it neuroscience
and spirituality or something
like that.
>>REGINA: And see who shows up.
You're probably there with--
you have your little cups
of coffee on the side,
thinking two people will show
up, and thousands will show up.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
It wasn't thousands yet.
But I definitely thought,
no one was going to show up.
But we had a room filled.
It was overflowing.
I think it was between
50 to 60 people.
>>REGINA: And it
was overflowing.
>>SOBHANI: But it
was overflowing
because we got such a
small room because I
didn't think anyone would come.
Yeah.
I was like, oh, no
one will come to this.
This will be fine.
But it was standing room only.
And they all had questions.
I mean, the topics were varied,
from precognitive dreams
to reincarnation to
psychedelics to just God
and religion and science.
And it was really great.
So it motivated us
to do more of that.
And because a lot
of them told us,
they were surprised to see it
on the planner, the program
for the conference,
that they never
see anything about
spirituality or consciousness
at this conference, and that
they wanted to stay in touch,
they wanted a group, they
wanted more references,
so we started all of that.
We started a website and
making a list of references.
We started Google group,
and we send out a newsletter
once a month just to recommend
things for them to read.
And then we continue to do this.
So we started it in 2022.
And we've done it
every year since then.
And it's growing.
And people, it's becoming
more open to the space.
Actually, when they
come, they share more.
And they're not as unsure about
themselves and what to say.
They're more like, I'm a
molecular neurobiologist,
but I'm also like
a Reiki healer,
or I do neurodevelopmental
neurobiology,
but I also can see
and hear spirits.
>>REGINA: This is much more
fabulous thing you've done.
I mean, this is the
beginning of the change,
is the people like you.
And I know the common
term or the popular term
is to be a disrupter,
but you actually are.
You're bringing in expanded--
it's more expansive.
And I'm very happy
that you chose this.
Obviously, you
were born to do it.
So I have just one
final question.
And that is, with the
people coming in and some
of the brilliant new,
really young people,
the Gen Z's coming up in this
field, what are you seeing?
Are you seeing that they're
maybe a little more open or not?
What's going on there?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, of course.
>>REGINA: Because
we always think,
oh, they're going to
be open to everything.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, it varies.
But I will say, this
year, man, there
was this group that came in.
We were just so in love with
them because they were young.
They were first-year
graduate students.
And they had brought their
undergraduate research
assistants with them.
It was a whole lab
that came together.
And they came late, but
they came with questions.
>>REGINA: Oh, I love it.
>>SOBHANI: And they
had read stuff already.
And they just had the
most interesting questions
and the most far out.
They had already
made connections.
They were like, what
part of the brain
is involved with
psychic phenomena?
How is trauma related to being
open to emergent experiences?
Allison and I were
just looking at them,
like, wow, they've arrived.
Yeah.
So it was really exciting.
I hope we get more of those.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, you will.
You're absolutely will.
And so we just have
a minute or two left.
So any final thoughts on where
you think this might be going
and just how the
experience of understanding
mind in a much
more expansive way
has just shifted your
complete reality?
>>SOBHANI: Yeah.
So as I mentioned,
for me, it was
philosophy that really
helped me blow open
that prison in my own mind.
So Allison and I are
trying to do that for them.
And I do think
that's key to making
them see your inside of
a box of your own making,
of your own choice.
Yes, science
operates in that box.
But if we start looking at our
results and our study designs
from other worldviews, it's
just a fun thought exercise
that we could do for now.
But it will loosen your
mind and the constraints.
So we're trying to
encourage that because I
do think that that is pivotal.
I think if they're staying
in the scientific materialist
mindset, it's a little
bit harder to get--
>>REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
>>SOBHANI: --to make the jump.
So that's where we're
focusing our efforts.
>>REGINA: Well, all I
can say is, good on you.
Congratulations.
And the world of science needs
many, many more people like you.
And you're helping
to foster some
of these young ones
become clones of you
or their own version of you.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, their
own unique selves.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Thank you so much for
sharing your story with us.
And I know it will
help other people who
have a hard time opening
up to all this here
that you had to struggle
so much because you
were so boxed in to the world
of education and science.
>>SOBHANI: Yeah, it's hard.
It's not an easy path,
but it's worth it.
>>REGINA: Thank
you so much, Mona.
>>SOBHANI: Thank you.
>>REGINA: The name of her book
is Proof of Spiritual Phenomena.
And you can find out
more about Mona's work
at monasobhaniphd.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.